[Music]
Hey listeners, it's Ross and it's summer
vacation here at Interesting Times,
which means that while I'm dragging my
kids to the beach, I'm sharing an
episode with you from my colleague Ezra
Klein's show. An episode conveniently
enough, that features me, Ross Dowet.
Ezra had me on his show this past spring
to talk about my recent book, Believe.
But in addition to the book promotion,
we covered all kinds of things. Pagan
and Christian impulses in the Trump
administration and conservatism,
psychedelics and demonic possession, and
even the touch of the divine in Ezra's
own life. So, with that supernatural
content warning, I hope you enjoy the
episode and happy summer.
[Music]
Hey.
Hey. Hey.
[Music]
I always enjoy conversations that I have
no earthly idea how to describe and
today's is very much in that vein. My
guest is my colleague Ross Douet. He's
the author of Believe: Why Everyone
Should Be Religious, a book I enjoyed
very much, even though quite a bit of it
I had some questions about. And he's the
host of the new and really excellent New
York Times opinion podcast, Interesting
Times, where he has been interviewing
people on the modern American right.
This is a conversation about mysticism
and the role it is playing in the Trump
administration and this era in politics
and belief and the role it plays in
society, in our lives. Ross' argument
for why I should be uh more religious
and you should be too. And it also gets
into some things I did not expect to be
talking about today on the show.
[Music]
>> Rosett, welcome to the show.
>> Ezra Klein, it is a pleasure to be here.
So last year after the first
assassination attempt on Donald Trump,
you wrote about Trump as a man of
destiny that he was quote a figure
touched by the gods of fortune in a way
that transcends the normal rules of
politics. How are you thinking about
that now?
>> Well, there were other passages in that
column that are worth emphasizing, but
yeah, I stand by that reading of the
Trump phenomenon. I I think one of the
ways in which my sense of politics
generally has changed over the course of
the Trump era is just I have more
appreciation for weird forces that are
outside certainly outside the control of
people who write about politics. You
can't have lived through the Trump era
as a conservative columnist or newspaper
writer and not have the sense of how
fundamentally
unimportant
columnists are to what happens in
American politics.
>> It is a consistent consistent theme
exercise in humility. It is. It Well,
but but even beyond that, you and I both
grew up in a period that was, I think,
reasonably described as a kind of
timeout from grand historical dramas. It
was not the end of history in a
totalizing sense, but the kind of
Francis Fukuyama view of the postcold
war era as one that had a certain kind
of predictability and order and
stability.
>> Under control.
>> History felt under control. Right? And
the reality is that much of human
history is just not under control in
that way. And there are forces that move
through history, generally forces that
move through history that are sort of
hard to predict and assess. But I I do
think often they are connected to
specific personalities. And there is
some kind of marriage between particular
personalities and particular moments.
And the idea of a man of destiny, a
great man of history, is a useful way of
thinking about that when it happens, as
I think it has happened with Donald
Trump, the rise of populism, the crackup
of the liberal order, and so on. The
reason I laughed at the outset is that
it's important to stress that someone
can be a man of destiny and be bad.
Someone can be a great man of history
and be worth opposing. You can look back
at Napoleon and say, man, he was sort of
above and beyond in terms of historical
forces and also root for Wellington at
Waterlue. That's okay.
>> How does a sense that Trump is a man of
destiny? Because I agree with you and I
think understanding
the interpretation of Trump is somehow
mystic is very important to
understanding his relationship now with
the right. But specifically, how do you
think it has changed the way his staff
and his allies treat him?
>> I think that it is very hard to go
through the kind of drama that Trump
himself personally went through in we
can go back further, but let's just say
the world that ran from January 6th
through his return to power. And if
you're on his side through that story,
not come away with the feeling that
you're sort of moving with the wave of
history. For people in Trump's circle,
this sense of it doesn't matter what the
polls say or the naysayers say.
Certainly doesn't matter what squishy
New York Times conservatives say, right?
They saw the bottom. Trump was disgraced
and ruined and persecuted and he was
going to be sent to jail. And then the
next thing you know, assassin's bullets
were missing him by a hair's breath and
he was making this incredible
unprecedented historical comeback. And
having lived through that, I think it's
hard to be swayed by people saying, "Hey
guys, you know, your poll numbers are
not looking so great. You know, this
tariff roll out not that well thought
out. What are what are the implications
of, you know, sending people to El
Salvador without due process?" like
those are sort of normal quotidian
sounding objections to administration
policy and I think at least for some
people caught up in the Trump phenomenon
they just seem sort of incommensurate to
the reality that you're like riding a
historical wave
>> but I don't think it's just the external
world and its judgment of Donald Trump
and you can tell me if you think this is
wrong but I think one of the biggest
differences between Trump one and Trump
two is that in Trump one his own staff
the people who surround arounded him
were perfectly comfortable thinking
President Donald Trump is very wrong
about this that his judgment is bad his
impulses need to be foiled we are the
resistance inside the Trump
administration and in Trump too I don't
think people around him are comfortable
thinking that I think there is both a
sense that they're there to serve him
but also a sense that there is something
in Trump to them not to me that exists
beyond argumentation the fact that the
terror of policy doesn't make sense on
its face. The fact that what he's doing
seems like a bad idea. Well, if you knew
better, then you'd be in the chair. And
so, the the unwillingness to question
him because there's a belief in a either
a a mystic purpose to him or that he has
a mystic beyond argumentation intuition
about things. I think it's really
changed the nature of the constraints
around him or the absence of constraints
around him. Yeah, I think there's also a
way in which the kind of mystic drama of
his return to power is also sort of
projected back onto his first term where
the experience of Trump's first term,
not just for liberals and Democrats, but
for a lot of Republicans, was obviously
sort of chaotic and bizarre and
difficult and so on. But there were ways
in which the results of that term were
better than people anticipated. I think
certainly they were better than I
anticipated. I expected as like a
columnist observer economic crisis and
foreign policy crisis to sort of define
Trump's first four years in office and
prior to co they didn't. The economy was
in good shape. I think you can make a
case that his foreign policy in the
first term worked better than Biden's I
think you can make a strong case
actually that it worked better than
Biden's foreign policy. And I think
what's happened now is that not just
people around him in the White House,
but also congressional Republicans,
people who, you know, would have doubts
about the tariffs and so on, have sort
of combined the mystical drama with the
surprisingly successful first term
record, put them together, and said,
"It's both that Trump has some sort of
mystic intuition about what to do, and
it's also that we doubted him before,
but it all worked out okay." Now,
obviously, the problem with that is that
one of the reasons it worked out okay
was precisely that there were a bunch of
people in the White House the first time
around who didn't have a mystical sense
of Trump's perspective or his goals or
anything like that. And that is, I
think, very clearly what is missing this
time around. There are people in the
White House who could play that role. I
think a lot of people expected Scott
Bent, the Secretary of the Treasury, or
Marco Rubio, the Secretary of State, to
play the kind of role that Gary Conn and
Steve Minutuchin and HR McMaster played
in the first term. But no one is
actually playing that role as far as
anyone can sort of see. And so, in an
odd way, the very success of sort of
Trump as man of destiny is unmaking the
conditions that made his first term a
success. But that is itself a dramatic
arc. You know, if you're writing the
novel of the story of sort of hubris and
nemesis, that would be a characteristic
way that hubris and nemesis would
manifest themselves.
>> Well, we tend to think of fortune as
synonymous with luck. But you go back to
Greek mythology and when you are touched
by fortune, when you get a fortune, when
you speak to the oracle, it often
doesn't work out that well. you you get
a clear prophecy that seems like it
foretells your success,
>> right?
>> And laced inside of that is your
downfall. I I think what kind of story,
what kind of mystic structure you
believe we're in. Is it one that is
providential or is it one where the gods
often laugh at human design?
>> Right. Well, I mean, I think a mistake
that I think some religious people make
is to see
a kind of force of destiny at work in a
particular figure and assume that that
force of destiny must mean that God, the
author of history, wants you to be on
that person's side directly. But in
fact, if you read, let's say, the Old
Testament, there's all kinds of moments
when God is working through figures to
accomplish something in the world or
sort of to move history or the drama,
the drama of salvation, history to put
it in Christian terms, right? In a
particular direction, but it doesn't
mean that the instrument that God is
working through is in fact the Messiah
or the chosen one, right? Like if God
sends the Babylonians to chastise the
wicked kings of Israel, doesn't mean
that you're supposed to necessarily say,
"Oh, hail Nebuchadnezzar. You know, you
are the chosen one." Sometimes I think
you can see Trump in several different
lights. You could say he's a man of
destiny and therefore he is bringing
about in some weird way that we didn't
see coming the new American golden age.
And this is obviously what a lot of
people on the center right wanted to
believe, especially when it became clear
that he was returning to power. Or you
could say he's a great man of history
who's unlocking some sort of change that
was necessary but bringing chaos in
order to do it. I wrote a lot about the
concept of decadence. This idea that the
west, the developed world was sort of
stuck in these kind of cycles and needed
to break out somehow. But the reality is
you often can't break out of decadence
without a big big mess. So maybe Trump
is the agent of that mess. Doesn't mean
he's a good person. Or finally it could
just be chastisement for everyone. All
are punished as Shakespeare said. I
think all of those possibilities have to
be taken seriously as readings of the
Trump phenomenon.
>> How well do you remember Batman Begins?
>> Uh I remember it. But
>> so as a person,
>> the League of Shadows, right, destroying
Gotham,
>> I've had this joke in my head often in
the past couple of months as somebody
whose mythic analogies tend to come from
the Marvel or DC universe more than the
the older the New Testament. That's just
like convince me we're not being
governed by the League of Shadows. And I
went back and I I rewatched the piece
where, you know, Rosal Ghoul sort of
reveals the whole plan and he says,
"Look, we've infiltrated every layer of
Gotham's power structure. We tried to do
this through financial engineering and
destroy Gotham's economy. It didn't
quite work. Now we're back for number
two."
And the fact that we are here is proof
of your decadence. The fact that we
could do this, get this close,
>> shows that you deserve what we are about
to do to you.
>> Yes. And I'm not saying we are actually
being governed by the League of Shadows,
but when you brought up the the
decadence, there is a dimension of that
to me when you think about this in in
those almost like narrative terms, sort
of reflection of very dark sides of our
own
>> society.
>> Well, and I've carried on a couple of
different running arguments throughout
the Trump era that are going to
continue, I guess. And one is with
people on the right who have a sort of
League of Shadows view of the overall
situation, right? It's like things are
so bad that you might as well unleash
chaos. You saw a lot of this in response
to the tariffs. People mostly on social
media, real politicians don't say this,
but people on social media who were
like, "Fine, we need a, you know, a
10-year reset of the whole global
economy because things are so bad and so
on." And I've spent a lot of time
disagreeing with those people. I would
prefer not to take the black pill, but
I've also spent time disagreeing with
the kind of liberals and sometimes, you
know, never Trump Republican critics of
Trump who I feel like don't quite grasp
why he's successful and what you need to
do in response because I I don't think
he could be this successful if it were
enough to just elect Joe Biden to fix
our problem.
>> Well, clearly that didn't that That
didn't work, right? It didn't work.
>> We tried that and definitely trying to
elect him twice to fix our problems was
not was not the winning move. I was
saying a couple months ago to Barry
Weiss's podcast and she had Luis Perry
who's a a sort of British conservative
gender and sexuality writer and Perry
made this argument that I've been
thinking about where she said that the
difference between Jordan Peterson and
Andrew Tate is that Peterson is a
Christian and Tate is a pagan. And I
think this might be unfair to historic
pagans, but the but the argument she was
making depends on the pagans, but also
depends on the Christians. So, but the
argument she was making is that Peterson
is at least in his ethics, somebody who
thinks a lot about the weak, who
cherishes women. Tate is more interested
in power, in dominance, in sort of
driving his enemies before him, and sort
of fathering a lot of children for a lot
of people potentially.
And I thought about that question that
that sort of war between
again sort of crude paganism and and
Christianity as really playing out right
now on the right and in the Trump
administration. There are ways in which
those strands seem braided through
everything. The sort of drive for power
for sort of renewed 19th century
masculinity versus the the the sort of
more Christian dimensions of it. There's
in a way like Vance as a emblem of the
Christian side of the administration.
You know, Musk is an emblem of its pagan
side with his many kids for many
different women.
>> Trump is somebody who in his both
traditionalism
>> like as a person
>> and also his brashness and will to power
as a person sort of has both threads
inside himself at the same time.
>> Maybe I mean honestly I think Trump may
have come to some conception of belief
in God after the assassination attempt
just sort of observing his comments a
little bit. But I I think of Trump as
just sort of persistently as a kind of
pagan or heathen figure much more than
he is a Christian figure not
withstanding the attempts to sort of
claim him as a kind of King David or
Emperor Constantine. Right? Like there's
sort of an idea that you get from
religious conservative supporters of
Trump that you have these figures in the
Bible or Christian history who are
rulers who are sinful in various ways
but maybe in a way like I've been
describing sort of advance God's cause
despite their sins and failings. I don't
really think of Trump that way but he is
committed in an explicit way to
Christianity. And to me, the bargain
with Trump has always been for religious
conservatives some mix of protection and
support, a transactional bargain, and
then more recently a kind of hope that
some kind of renewal of American
dynamism can sort of bring religion
itself back with it, which I will say is
a hope that I have indulged in myself,
that it's like, okay, you have different
varieties of post-Christianity out there
and you don't want to ally with the
Andrew Tape hates, but you do want to
ally with the people who have sort of
big hopes for the future rather than a
woke progressivism that just seems sort
of inflicted with cultural despair. That
would be an argument that I think a
Christian who was trying to sort of
explain to themselves how they find
themselves in alliance with Elon Musk
might say, you know, better Elon who has
some good desires and believes that
humanity is good in some way and wants a
sort of more dynamic future. Better that
than pure pessimism, the climate change
is going to kill us all and structural
racism means we deserve it kind of
perspective. That that would be the
argument.
>> Let me ask about the idea that what you
just described though is pure pessimism.
Putting aside the idea that climate
change will will kill us all, which I
don't believe. I think most people even
on the the left don't believe. They
believe there's a way out. You just have
to really work for it.
>> Mhm.
>> You give at the end of your book an
account of why you're a Christian and
why you're a Catholic and why you find
it persuasive. And I find your account
of it very moving. It's a thing that
appeals to me about Christianity. And
the account you give is about both the
strangeness and the radicalism of Jesus
Christ as a figure. How uncomfortable it
is to read him. How challenging. How
it's a religion about meekness. All of
the the camels have a better chance of
fitting through the eye of the needle
than the rich man of getting into
heaven. That there's always been a
radicalism in that.
>> Yeah. I mean I I know the meek will
inherit the earth is a famous. I would
say renunciation more than meekness
probably.
>> But there's a godliness of those who do
not have power.
>> Yes.
>> And at the same time then there is this
administration I think is very
self-consciously tries to be frame
itself as Christian but people in it are
like JD Vance and I do not
>> many people in the
>> I do not see in them
>> in the way they act in this world this
love of those who do not have power.
There's the kind of putting out of memes
where they've made a Studio Giblly meme
out of an immigrant crying. It's
something about the interplay here of a
self-conscious Christianity and a
self-conscious mimedic cruelty
that both feels like very appalling to
me, but also
uncchristian as I understand it.
>> Yeah. Yeah. I mean, I think the
aspect of
populism, conservative populism,
right-wing populism, whatever you want
to call it, that does see itself in
clear continuity with Christian ideas
and Christian views, basically holds
that it is speaking on behalf of the
weak and the oppressed, people who don't
have a voice in society. And those
people are the nativeorn working class
of the western world who have been asked
to bear inappropriate burdens beginning
with economic I'm I'm just framing the
case beginning with the economic burdens
imposed by free trade regimes that sent
their jobs overseas and continuing with
the burden of again this is this is the
argument of sort of social disorder and
breakdown associated with the drug trade
in a globalized world, the free movement
of peoples that sort of transforms
cities and neighborhoods and in ways
that again fall most heavily on lower
middle class Americans and are sort of
avoided and evaded by the upper class.
The narrative is basically that the
beneficiaries of globalization are the
equivalent of the rich person in various
of Jesus's parables. And certainly Jesus
does not hesitate at various moments in
the gospels to say pretty harsh things
about people who have betrayed their
leadership role. So, like the one reason
I pushed back on meekness is yes, Jesus
uses the word meek, but Jesus himself is
not a meek figure. And you can go
through the New Testament and find
plenty of cases where Jesus says
incredibly harsh things, mostly about
powerful people, about sinners, where
Jesus cleanses the temple and drives the
money lenders out and curses the fig
tree that doesn't bear fruit. You can go
on the powerful here. What I'm asking
about is the treatment of the powerless
which even if you believe and I I don't
contest this point that many many many
people in this country have borne undue
burdens like I understand that is
central to liberal politics too. It is
the cruelty with which poor immigrants
are treated. The kind of laughing about
it that it's fine if you want to say
they should be unkind to Ezra Klein like
a New York Times columnist. I more mean
that there is an embrace of mimemetic
cruelty not aimed at the powerful but
aimed at other forms of the powerless
where as I sort of understand the
radicalism of this ethic. It is a
whatever your border policy there should
be a profound compassion for you know
Haitians who came here fleeing some of
the most desperate poverty in the world
to work hard at jobs to build up a life
for their families. There's something
about the weaponization of cruelty
against the powerless. It is what I'm
trying to get at.
>> No. And I I think as I said before, you
have what you're describing as Christian
and pagan tendencies braided together in
the Trump administration. And I think
that not all but many of the things that
you describe absolutely reflect more of
a pagan sensibility than the Christian
one. But I agree with you that
particular steps the Trump
administration has taken in this term
are not Christian, anti-Christian. And I
think the forces, you know, I mean, I I
think it started with the cuts to
foreign aid. I think you can completely
justify some kind of renovation of the
foreign aid program. Christians are not
bound to support any particular set of
programs. But I think the way in which
the foreign aid programs were reshuffled
and cut off and and so on was a failure
of Christian duty in a pretty obvious
way that and and the the core
motivations there were just different
from the motivations the evangelical
motivations of the Bush era and
reflected frankly just overall the
decline of Christianity in American life
since since then. I will just say though
since you know we're taking a pretty
hard line of critique I think you watch
this happen all the time on the left in
different ways over the last 5 or 10
years where people who I considered
sensible good well-meaning moderate
people were in a coalition with people
who had more intensity more passion more
zeal who made a certain set of demands
on them that led people I knew and
admired and respected to I think
compromise their own values
in ways that also had sort of real world
material consequences. I don't want to
like relitigate I I don't want to
relitigate wokeness, but part of the
nature of politics in a landscape where
there's no kind of religious consensus,
there's no kind of moral consensus,
right, is that forces that appear to
have energy behind them. Again, to go
back to where we started, world
historical energy perhaps will sort of
draw people who have convictions that
should put them in tension with those
views into certain kinds of compromises.
And I but I agree. I absolutely think I
do not admire the way that the Trump
administration approaches any of the
policies that you're talking about from
humanitarian aid to the deportations to
El Salvador. I guess to me one of the
things I'm getting at in life broadly
but in the policies specifically or in
in the rhetoric in the comportment I
think a lot about JD Vance who's a
person in many ways I think should have
had some protection from this I think he
is Christian I think he does think a lot
about virtue and ethics and you brought
up the tariffs I don't think there's
anything uncchristian about the tariffs
I think they're bad economics not bad
religion and a lot of these policies I
actually believe that about I think
people can have very mistaken views on
policy
because they are just wrong about what
the policies will do in the world. I
have had mistaken views on policies
because I was wrong about what the
policies would do in the world or the
way they would be carried out. It's more
the compatibility
between what I think has become a
dominant tone. And I think we're in a
very unstable
era in terms of our what I might call
like our political manners. Madaglacius
had a piece today about the way a lot of
his uh Hitler revisionism is beginning
to happen out of a kind of feeling that
we have over penalized
questions about race, questions of
anti-semitism, and that in order to
widen the boundaries of debate, you have
to have on World War II revisionists.
And there's a a sense that this sort of
politics of manners didn't work. And so
politics of no manners needs to be tried
now. And I think Donald Trump has sort
of been a an innovator and a pioneer in
that. and it's created a lot of
mimemetic imitators who on the one hand
don't have some of his I don't know
lightness or authenticity or or
funniness but on the other it's just
that I think I am weirdly even though
I'm not myself religious a little bit
idealistic about religion and I feel
about my own religion which I think
should create very profound sympathy for
refugees and that has not been something
I've seen in the past couple of years
and I think it's a Christianity where It
feels to me like it should create a kind
of buffer against greed and cruelty that
I often see broken when it would be
politically viable to break in.
>> Right? So, well, two things. One is that
yes, you are describing the story of
both Judaism and Christianity's
engagement with history and fallen human
nature. And this is something that is in
fact advertised in both the Old
Testament and the New Testament and all
of history since is that the story of
the Jewish people in the Old Testament
is not a story of people who were chosen
by God and given a bunch of commandments
and then obeyed them all. It's a story
of people who remained the chosen people
despite failing in every possible way
including to fit our conversation
repeated flirtations with heathenism and
paganism and idolatry. And then you can
obviously tell a similar story. You
know, the New Testament, Christians
don't have political power, but the
apostles are always screwing up and
messing up. And then of course, the
history of Christianity's entanglement
with political power is filled with sins
and failings that again like this era's
set are, you know, are sort of not not
atypical, I guess. But then the second
point that I want to push you on is like
what kind of argument is this that you
think you're going to win with religious
believers who disagree with you. You're
like, "Well, I don't believe in your
religion, but I really wish that you
would follow your religion so that your
politics were more aligned with mine."
Like, that's just not much of an
argument at all. And to the extent that
all of liberalism, the ideology that you
subscribe to, trades on inherited ideas
from Christianity about morality and
equality and so on, while you've
jettisoned the portrait of the universe,
the metaphysical structure that gives
them meaning. I think it's really hard
from that point of view for you to get
anywhere in arguments with people who
still believe in that structure because
you're essentially saying, "I've
stripped away the conceptual framework
that makes your moral ideas make sense,
but now I'm going to complain that
you're not living up to your moral
ideas. I just think that's a really weak
argument."
>> Oh, but I'm not arguing that.
>> Well, you're saying it to me. I'm right
I'm right here. I'm a Christian. I'm
right here. You're arguing you're you're
expressing sorrowful disappointment that
Christians are not living up to a
worldview that you think is false.
>> Well, I think parts of it are well, I am
I am unconvinced on parts of it. We
we'll talk about the the view of the
cosmos in a minute. And I'm not trying
to offend you here. I'm actually asking
>> I'm not Ezra. Has anything about our
long relationship suggest that you could
possibly offend me?
>> I've known you long enough to know when
you're getting a bit heated.
>> That's totally different heatedness. I
mean, as I was saying, the New Testament
is filled with heated encounters.
>> Look, I don't think a thing I'm saying
here is going to convince somebody on
the Christian right to turn around their
view of Donald Trump. I am genuinely
curious how somebody of your politics
and your religious background interpret
somebody like JD Vance. So, I'm asking
you questions about it.
>> Christianity does not provide some kind
of incredibly strong bull work against
powerful people doing the kinds of
things that powerful people do. which
means self-interested conquest of
various kinds and so on. What it does
provide is an ongoing internal critique
that those powerful people have to
wrestle with and address in ways that
are fairly unique in the historical
relationship of power and piety. So if
you look at something like to take the
most famous example maybe the Spanish
conquest of the Americas in terms of
what is actually done in the course of
the Spanish conquest of the Americas.
You can find plenty of terrible crimes
that you Ezra Klein would say well you
know what good is your religion if your
civilization commits these kind of
crimes. But from the very beginning in
Spain itself in the heart of super
Catholic like you know
counterreformation era Spain there's an
ongoing and agonizing and sometimes
intensely legal and practical sometimes
high level philosophical theological
debate that subjects the behavior of the
Spanish concistadors and others to this
kind of sustained critique and leads to
at various times sometimes successful
mostly unsuccessful reform efforts
driven by the Catholic monarchy of Spain
and ultimately builds out and influences
everything from the anti-slavery
movement in the 18th and 19th century
that's ultimately successful down to uh
contemporary ideas about human rights
and international law that again today's
secular liberals take for granted as a
kind of scripture. All of that emerges
out of the efforts of serious Christians
in a context of profound historical
temptation and constant sinfulness to
sort of generate from within the
resources of their religion. And I think
you know if you take the Trump
administration for instance, it's not as
though you cannot find Christian
critiques of Trump administration
cruelty. They just are not at the moment
the primary thing. I would expect I mean
we'll find out, right? We're 3 months
into a kind of shock and awe
administration and people have been sort
of I think people have been sort of
baffled and surprised by some of the
turns that things have taken. But
certainly people I take seriously within
conservative Christianity have spoken
out against things like the cuts to
humanitarian aid or anything like that.
Again, I completely agree with you that
history supplies
constant tests of what your religion is
for. And there's no end until the end to
the testing. And sometimes sometimes you
succeed. More often you fail, but
hopefully you do something that has good
effects down the road. And sometimes you
fail entirely and then maybe God sifts
you and finds you wanting. I'm not, you
know, I'm not I'm not kidding here,
right? that this is actually like it is
important to see every moment as a
potential moral test that you might well
be failing as a you know I'm I'm I'm a
conservative Christian you could say I'm
a member of the Christian right for your
purposes right as Christianity has
weakened in American life a really hard
question has become like who is the most
dangerous of your different enemies or
who who is who is most threatening to
the Christian view of the good society.
Is it a woke progressivism that wants to
again this is this would just be the
narrative right? I think it has you know
wants to abolish basic ideas about
differences between the sexes that
supports you know abortion at any stage
in pregnancy that's hostile to the basic
religious liberties of Christians again
from the conservative Christian point of
view. Is it Donald Trump's populism with
its heathen cruelties? Is it
transhumanism? Like, is the the final
boss of this era that religious
believers will have to confront actually
Silicon Valley? And if it is, like, can
you make alliances within Silicon
Valley? Is it better to be with Elon
Musk and his 17 children than to be with
some other people involved?
>> Also, Neurolink is
>> it's it's pushing transhumanism forward
very fast if it can.
>> Well, but there's also different
transhumanisms like which you know what?
Anyway, all all I'm all no, these are
actually these are things that I myself
am profoundly uncertain about in this
moment. Like what is the greatest danger
from a Christian perspective to the
future of the human race? I'm not
entirely sure.
[Music]
So a big part of your book as I read it
is about what happens when elite society
becomes hostile in its view of the world
to the human impulse to seek a picture
of reality that runs deeper than
materialism.
What happens when the seekers have
nowhere to go? When organized religion
weakens? When or not nowhere to go, what
happens when they are not channeled into
organized religion? And what happens
when elite society becomes too
materialistic? And I understand for you,
and you can tell me if this is wrong,
that one of the forces I think that you
believe is driving the era is a kind of
frustrated seeking, a sort of desire to
re-enchant the world like that has run
into an elite culture. Maybe it's apex
being the Obama administration and and
that sort of moment in American life.
>> It's the Ezra Klein show.
Ezra, let's be honest here.
>> Although that Well, we'll get into this.
I always joke the difference between you
and me is more that you're a Catholic
and I'm a Californian than that I'm a
materialist and you're not cuz
>> well there well one can use the word
materialist in different ways too
>> when you use it in this context what do
you mean
>> I mean the view that all of existence
life the universe and everything is
finally reducible to matter in motion
that matter is primary and mind is
secondary rather than the other way
around I don't mean materialism in terms
of Madonna's material girl or something
like that. Although the two can be
connected. So one of the various
arguments in my book is that
disenchantment is fake fundamentally.
The idea that you can enter a secular
age where once upon a time people had
wild religious experiences but now we
inhabit the iron cage of modernity and
all of those are off the table. That
just doesn't describe reality. Mystical
experience, religious experience, it's
not just the impulse. It's like I think
secular liberals are very comfortable
saying, "Oh, well, there's always a
religious impulse." But it's more than
that. It's that people have encounters
with God, whatever God may be, some kind
of higher reality that enters them and
transforms them and gives them visions
and gives them intense experiences or
maybe they have them on the verge of
death and come back to tell about them.
You know, this is just a feature of
human life. It's a very profound and
important feature of human life. Maybe
it can be explained in non-religious
terms. Maybe there's some reductive
explanation, but there isn't a good one
on offer right now. And so the
persistence of that means that religion
always regenerates itself because even
under conditions where almost nobody is
committed to a particular church or
creed, people are going to go on having,
you know, dramatic encounters, right?
Like someone like, you know, Barbara
Erin Reich, who's famous.
>> I had her on for this book,
>> right? Famous left liberal writer wrote
a whole book called
>> and a famous atheist.
>> Yes. famous atheist called Living with a
Wild God, right? And it was just a book
about a very secular person who had a
lot of religious experiences, like
experiences that if you went and read
William James or read like a medieval
Catholic mystic or something would be
totally familiar and she, you know,
didn't have sort of a framework, a
conceptual framework to fully process
them and wrote a great book, really
interesting book about it.
>> You tell the story that you tell in your
book. I don't remember the man's name,
but he's the editor of Skeptics magazine
or something like that.
>> Right? So, this is Michael Shurmer, who
is one of the more famous professional
skeptical debunkers of religious claims,
supernatural things, and so on. And in
one of his books, but he's told this
story several times to his great credit,
he was getting married and his wife had
I'm going to butcher this slightly, but
had a great uncle who had been very
close to her and had was the kind of
person who would have given her away at
the wedding, but was had passed away.
So, she was feeling sort of lonely and
isolated. And they had a radio that had
come from him. And the radio was broken.
Didn't work. Had never worked. Shurmer
had tried to fix it. It didn't It just
didn't work. It was broken. Right. And
at the end of the wedding during the
reception, they heard music from the
back of the house and went back into a
back room and there was the radio
playing a love song. And I think it like
transitioned from that to some kind of
classical music for the late later in
the evening and then shut off and never
worked again. And this experience, you
know, affected Shurmer again to his
credit, right? It was like evidence
against interest. And I think again, you
have to sort of trust as always with
these stories, right? You have to sort
of trust his general reliability and so
on that it wasn't just that like there
was a battery that was jiggled or
something like the radio didn't really
didn't work and really never worked
again. There really was no obvious
material way that this could have
happened. Shurmer in the end works out a
theory of the multiverse where in some
different timeline much like in the
movie Interstellar his wife's great
uncle is capable of accessing our
timeline and to Shurmer this is sort of
an escape from like supernatural
explanations but one reason to just tell
that story is that as I think you know
because I was joking about your show
being the epitome of secularization the
apogee whatever people have experiences
like this all the time right like I'm
not a materialist,
>> right? This is a very commonplace kind
of experience. Not super common place.
You're not going to have one tomorrow
probably, but like this stuff just is
part of the warp and woof of reality.
And so to finally long-windedly answer
your original question, I think what
happens in conditions when you have weak
institutional religions and a secular
expert class that is not militantly
atheistic, but sort of says, you know,
officially these things don't happen. is
that people feel like they can't really
go all the way up to the creator god
Yahweh Jehovah outside of time and space
and they start looking for sort of
intermediate powers to become a kind of
locust for their own spiritual impulses.
You know, stuff with psychedelics, stuff
with literal paganism, including stuff
on the right. And then the interesting
zone in a way is AI which is the place
where sort of scientific ideas meet a
kind of you know slightly
supernaturalist sense of like the
machine god as this power that is into
which we are going to commend ourselves.
But yeah I and I and I think that
tendency again this is what Christians
would say but that tendency is is bad.
It's not that secondary spiritual powers
don't exist in the universe. There are
in fact angels and demons and things
like that, saints and other powers
perhaps more mysterious still. But not
all those powers have human good in mind
and it's better to approach them through
one of the big old traditional religions
that tries to subject them to a kind of
higher ordering.
>> Let me hold you there because we'll
we'll get to this.
>> I want to distinguish two arguments that
the book could make and that you take
one path in particular.
So I am somebody who believes deeply in
mystery. I'm that kind of agnostic where
I'm Californian.
>> I'm a Californian. Exactly.
>> And the sort of first half of the book
or for a third of the book is sort of
about this. It's an argument that you I
would call it an argument that you
should believe that a kind of new
atheist materialism is incompatible with
any kind of reasonable understanding of
the world, in its complexity, in its
unruliness, in the experiences people
have in the things that it now
increasingly requires you to believe.
Like either human consciousness is
somehow having some profound effect on
quantum physics or if you're going to
take a much more straightforward view of
the math, we're splitting into
uncountable new realities at all times.
Like the implications are getting
weirder and weirder.
>> So many podcasts,
>> so many podcasts. I love all that stuff.
But so there's an argument for belief
and then there's an argument for
channeling that belief. And I understand
the book to really be about the second
argument. I actually think the first
argument is pretty straightforward, but
it's about channeling this belief into
organized religion.
So given the strangeness of everything
you just described and then also given
that the big organized religions
disagree on many things, a point you
make on the book
>> a few. Yep.
>> Why go there? Why is it not enough to
just say you should believe that this
world is not something we understand how
to explain and you should be open to all
these things that violate a materialist
intuition about it. What's the argument
for going into organized religion as the
answer for such profound unruliness?
>> Well, a couple things. So first of all,
I don't think that the case for not
being a materialist is a case for sort
of total unruliness.
To the contrary, I think part of the
case for not being a materialist is
precisely the order of the universe. One
of the problems that materialism has
that you sort of gestured at is
accounting for the specific ways in
which the universe is ordered. The
beauty and precision and symmetry
involved and also as far as we can tell
the extreme unlikeliness that this
particular order would be selected for
unless whoever selected it were
interested in listening to lots of
podcasts. No, but create you know
creating planets, stars and conscious
beings. So you have the religious
argument is is an argument for
overarching structure and then the ways
in which it is weird are not themselves
entirely random like there are patterns
in spiritual experience. There's no sort
of predictability to it overall but the
kinds of experiences that people have
have a certain kind of consistency. You
can track different kinds of spiritual
experiences across different cultures.
You can track them in near-death
experiences. You can track them in terms
of like studies of what appear to be
miraculous healings and so on. And again
there there just seems to be a way in
which you have this overarching order.
You have some sort of mysterious
relationship between our consciousness
and that overarching order. And then you
have a lot of religious experiences that
seem like higher forces trying to be in
touch with us and have some kind of
relationship with us. That's the basic
picture that again, most of the big
religions offer, allowing for all their
differences. Buddhism and Christianity
have pretty substantial differences, but
they each describe a universe that's
generally like that.
>> So, uh, I want to be careful because
when I say I'm a Californian, I'm being
jokey about it. They're often there, of
course, many Orthodox Jews in California
and committed Catholic Christians in
California and so on.
>> Absolutely. So, uh, but I I I am very
familiar with a a kind of California
seeker mentality.
>> Yep.
>> And I think the answer from that
perspective to what you just said is
yes, there are patterns. Yes, there are
buckets. There is a consistency
or a couple maybe consistencies to
near-death experiences or to memories
that young kids have of what at least
some people take to be past lives or
things like the radio turning on or or
or or
but none of these really fit all at
least not all of them into any of the
big religions. They don't I I've read
enough of the religions to say that what
I describe as the unruliness when I say
that I mean enough things that don't fit
a kind of simplified view of reality
that it would make me wonder about
materialism but also I don't think
Judaism explains them all. I don't think
that Catholicism explains them all. I'm
not saying I know what does Hinduism
>> well Hinduism is big enough.
>> It's quite big actually. explain.
>> I'm not saying that I know what does
>> argue arguably from your premises you
should probably be
>> I'm not saying that I know what does.
What I'm saying is that I'm very
sympathetic to how it can kind of spin
you into a profound openness.
I know many people who have gone there
where what it seems to me now is having
come to believe in these kinds of
things. It's very hard for them to say
where to stop believing
>> and they now believe a lot of things
that are maybe contradictory
>> or their gurus who are all saying
different things but once you open
yourself it's hard it can become hard to
close back down.
>> But for them you know some of them grew
up in a faith tradition. For them, the
faith tradition didn't explain too much
of what they then began to see or
experience or or or come to believe in.
I don't think any of the traditions have
a really good explanation for why we
have sort of weirdly consistent alien
abduction experiences, which I don't
believe to be alien abductions, but I'm
not sure what to make of them.
>> What is your response to someone like
that? I think that there's a balance
that you have to strike in looking for a
particular religious tradition as
opposed to just being a kind of
open-ended seeker.
And you want, I think, a religious
tradition that has a set of sort of core
views that make sense of a lot of what
you've described and also a certain
degree of flexibility and uncertainty
about some of the things that don't fit
into exactly its world picture. But
yeah, the wide array of religious
experiences, the data on its own should
would make you a kind of like the term I
use in the book is perennialist, right?
This is the theory that all the great
religions encode some of the truth about
reality. You kind of can't go wrong with
any of them as long as they're big
enough and old enough, but none of them
are like the the fullness of truth. I
would say though just as a Roman
Catholic that Roman Catholicism again
one of the things that I appreciate
about it is that it has a certain kind
of supernatural
capaciousness. Not in terms of all its
formal doctrines. It's not like you open
up the Catechism of the Catholic Church
and they're like, "Well, here's what we
think about aliens." I mean, it's in
there. It's on but the pages are
>> in the Vatican. There is quite a bit
about
>> in the Vatican. There is some stuff
about that stuff. But you know if you
look at actual the history of Catholic
cultures for instance in terms of like
the afterlife right zones like purgatory
and limbo and so on have some kind of
connection to people's arguments about
ghosts and hauntings and that form of
the supernatural. Catholic cultures have
always been pretty hospitable to ideas
about fairies. I don't know how I've
ended up on nice New York Times podcast
talking about the good people, but the
idea of sort of like there are angels
and demons and then there are these sort
of weird like trickster beings. If you
asked me to like make a case for
Catholicism's capaciousness, I could
make that case. But then the other thing
is, and this is I'm curious what you
think about this, right, is that one of
one of the things I argue in the book,
it's not a provable assertion, right?
It's the idea that if there is this
overall structure and order to the
universe and if there seem to be sort of
higher powers interested in talking to
human beings then maybe you should
assume that like God is not out to trick
you. The universe is not a trick like
it's not actually presenting you with
this sort of impossible open-ended
question. It's basically there's a
certain number of big religions. They've
stood the test of time. they've had a
pretty powerful shaping influence on
human history. Why wouldn't you go in
for one of them rather than saying, you
know, in good California's style like I
just have to remain perfectly open. I
think that if if you can accept that the
universe might have been created with us
in mind, then you should give deference.
>> So I want to say that I loved the book.
I really really enjoyed it. And this was
my the the point where it helped me
clarify where my intuitions maybe go
very differently.
which is I think at a fundamental level,
I expect that
anything that has worked at mass scale
across many different institutional
regimes as an organized religion is
likely to have conformed so much to
politics and institutions as to have
strayed from how profoundly radical
whatever kind of spiritual truth might
exist is. This is a way in which the
sort of gambit I had at the beginning
about Trump is was connected to the meat
of this conversation where I found the
argument that you should assume that a
religion's success over time is going to
correlate to some kind of fundamental
truth value.
I felt you could take that both ways. I
felt you could also take it the other
way, which is to say that the religions
that survive are going to be the ones
that are institutionally compatible with
many different regimes and often contort
themselves into those regimes. And we
talked about the Spanish conquest and
the Inquisition. I've been reading about
the Renaissance recently. Um, Ada
Palmer's great book on inventing the
Renaissance. And I wouldn't say the
popes of that era like cover themselves
in in glory. I think you could say this
about forms of Judaism, about forms of
Buddhism, which Buddhism is a much more
complicated institutional story than
people who have been raised in America
on like West Coast Spirit Rock Buddhism,
I think, tend to believe there. There
are all these questions where I think
that I believe that whatever sort of
ultimate truth is out there is going to
be extremely inconvenient and strange.
And as you said earlier, and something I
thought was quite stirring, the sense
that every moment might be a moral test.
>> Mhm.
>> That a religion that took that truly
seriously would end up being very
incompatible with ruling regimes and
would have a lot of trouble from them,
which of course at times these religions
have,
>> haven't they? I mean,
>> they've often too, you know, that as
well,
>> right? I I guess I see I think you're
making actually precisely the case for
in different ways both Judaism and
Christianity as probably divinely
founded which is to say these religions
have survived and persisted across
multiple different kinds of cultures
multiple different kinds of regimes in
each era. Exactly as you say, elements
of these religions have made
compromises, have intertwined themselves
in profound ways, right? Like you
couldn't get more intertwined than
medieval Catholicism and medieval
feudalism. And I think if you were a
secular historian looking at that
intertwinement, you'd say probably
whenever feudalism breaks up,
Christianity is going to go away too. Or
Judaism, right? Judaism is a, you know,
religion of temple prayer. religion
that's centered on the temple and the
Holy of Holies and everything else. You
look at that as a secular historian,
you're like, well, obviously, you know,
if some empire, we'll call it the
Romans, comes along and destroys that,
then, you know, Judaism is going to
disappear, too. That's not what happens.
Instead, you have these periods of
intertwinment that are then shattered in
some way. And in each case, I mean, the
first thing to say is that the
radicalism that you describe persists in
those eras. And again to go back to the
point I was making earlier, this is
something the religions themselves
advertise. The Old Testament, the Hebrew
Bible, right, is a story where the Jews
are failing your tests. The tests that
you, Ezra Klein, are setting. You're
like, "Well, if this religion was really
from God, they probably wouldn't all
become idoltors." And they're like,
"Ezra, here's our holy book. It's all
about how we became idoltors." But guess
what? Then God did something new and
people did something new and the story
continued. And I mean, I just think what
you're offering I think you think it's I
don't want to I I think Yeah. I think
you think you're setting God free a bit
from what you see as the corruptions of
Trump era Christianity or medieval
Inquisition era Christianity. And you're
like, "No, God is bigger than that.
Therefore, a religion that is always
getting entangled with worldly power,
that can't be where God is." But what
you end up with is a council of despair
where you're like, well, the only
religion that would be worthy of God is
one that would be exterminated within
like 50 years of its founding by the
cruel state. You're ending up saying
that a religion good enough to join
could not exist on the earth.
>> Well, I don't think I'm saying a
religion good enough to join could not
exist in the earth. I'm not trying to
set God free from anything because I
genuinely am not sure. It's not a pose
for me. I think to a couple times in
this you think I'm making an argument
when I'm actually genuinely confused or
if not genuinely confused genuinely
uncertain. I find the uncertainty
radical and I will say within my own
belief system to the extent it counts as
a belief system which I'm not sure it
should. Mystery and uncertainty is both
very much at its heart and to me very
comforting.
When I was younger I just had a
crippling fear of death. just really
truly terrible mortality anxiety and
somehow what eased it for me was
eventually coming to the view that I
just was never going to know and I don't
know why I found that comforting and I
don't know why that has stuck but I did
and to some degree it it has so when I I
say this I am actually not saying that I
think I have some answer here that you
don't I really don't
>> I'm actually testing my intuition
against I want to hear your answers And
I'm I'm not I'm not trying to be too
aggressive, Ezra. I think that as you
know from reading the book, I think that
the intuition that a lot of modern
people have about that even if you can
see that materialism is too limited,
there is just this fundamental
unknowability hanging over everything. I
think that intuition is mistaken. I
think it is correct about certain
aspects of religion. I think there are
issues in religion and questions in
religion that hang over every tradition
imperfectly resolved. I'm not here to
tell you I've resolved the problem of
evil. Problem of evil is a real problem.
It's a real issue. Again, I think it's
an issue that's sort of there and
acknowledged and wrestled with
throughout the Old and New Testament.
But I don't think you're going to sit
down and just reason your way into a
solution to that problem. I do think
though that you can get a little bit
further like just even in the example
that you cited. I don't know what your
sort of metaphysical perspectives as as
a kid were. But I certainly agree that I
would personally find it more comforting
to believe that death is a mystery than
to be Richard Dawkins, right, and
believe that death is just the absolute
end and never could be anything else. I
just think it's it is in fact more
probable than not that after you die,
you will meet God, whatever God is, and
be asked to account for your life and so
on. And that's not inherently
comforting.
>> Yeah. You and I have have had this
conversation.
quite terrifying, but I think it is it's
quite terrifying.
>> But I think that it is something that is
reasonable to believe that should give
you a little bit more than just a sense
of mystery. And more than that, I think
it is what God himself in his infinite
mystery and power wants you to believe,
which is why he has me here talking to
you. I have
>> heaven. I've often thought of you in my
life as heavens, Ross. I'm no I mean I'm
you know it doesn't doesn't mean good
things about my final destination. I'm
just an instrument. But I guess the
argument I'm just making is I think one
can get just a little bit further than
just mystery itself.
[Music]
One argument you make in the book, you
sort of give the example like the
canonical example of if you believe in a
merciful God, how do you explain the
child with leukemia? And you basically
say that in any reasonable understanding
of God, any reasonable understanding of
religion, you can't you can't possibly
understand the plan. You can't possibly
we were in a way talking about this with
Donald Trump that the sort of unfolding
of things will always be so far beyond
the human mind that the idea that you've
like poked out a contradiction is a
little bit ridiculous. I actually agree
with that. But then I think that when it
comes to the organized religions, you
say a few times that you sort of just
have trouble believing a providential
god would allow these religions that are
wrong, that are weward to expand and
thrive in the way that they have. And I
think an intuition that people like me
have is that it is hard to say that some
things can be resolved by well a god who
is good will not allow X to happen. And
then some things have to be resolved
with you can't possibly understand why
God is allowing X to happen or Y to
happen. And so questioning it or being
unwilling to take this on faith is
unreasonable.
>> Yeah. I don't think you should take on
faith
that the major world religions are
providential.
And I think you could imagine yourself
if you lived in a world where the
dominant set of religions all practiced
human sacrifice. And you know I mean you
you can you can you can imagine that
kind of situation. I think the the case
for taking the big religions seriously
therefore you've pushed me on this
effectively. Yeah. Can't just rest on
their size and scale alone. You do also
have to think that in the aggregate
they've had what you as someone who has
you know particular moral intuitions
given by God one hopes at some level
have had a positive impact on the world
and shaped it in positive ways and also
that they have and this is also sort of
important to my argument that they do
have real overlaps and and I think that
they do I think the major world
religions if you look at them just and
sort of analyze as the ethical
perspective of the major world
religions, you do see a certain kind of
overlap. It is not enough to say these
things are big and present and you have
to take it on faith that they're where
God wants you to be. You do also have to
actually look at them and pass some kind
of judgment on them.
>> As I so often do, I want to go back to
fairies.
>> Please.
>> One of the other arguments you make is
that the organiz
>> You should call them the good. You don't
want to attract too much of their
attention. So why don't you call them
the good people? good people which I
actually I will admit I am unfamiliar
here and did not know that. Uh so
>> you've come here you've come here to
learn.
>> Well actually this is exactly what I'm
about to say what just happened which
depending on whether or not you believe
in the good people I guess which is that
one of your other arguments is that if
you come to the view that the world has
supernatural or extrahuman forces,
intelligences, agents, etc. Right? if
you're if you are a seeker of that sort
that one thing the major religions have
which is I think it's fair to say has
been largely downplayed in a lot of
modern society is actually a belief
about those dangers and arguably
experience with those questions
including maybe what to call and not not
call the good people and one of your
arguments here is that there are is more
spiritual danger
once you accept some of these premises
is then people often give credit to that
it's not just about belief or or
unbelief. It's about the possibility of
falling into the wrong beliefs of
listening to the wrong voices of
following the tricksters of following
more demonic forces. And one thing you
appreciate about Catholicism is a little
bit more openness to that that world of
of forces.
I just found that interesting. I always
find your kind of openness to the occult
to be I don't know. I don't want to say
>> openness to the occult is not what I
want to advertise.
>> Is that not how you want to talk about?
>> Well well I mean the reality is that
like you know in the book as you know I
have an entire chapter on sort of
supernatural experience and weirdness
and I actually debated with myself how
much to write about things that are
explicitly demonic. Catholicism
obviously has it a special focus on this
through the office of the exorcist.
there's lots of literature on the
demonic and demonic possession and I
ended up feeling quite uncomfortable
writing about it too much and so it
there's a couple paragraphs and some
footnotes and people who are interested
in it can follow that material but there
is a kind of yeah there there's a kind
of balance that you want to strike as
just an observer or a writer between
sort of acknowledging those kind of
weirder and darker and more disturbing
realities but not like focusing too much
attention on them and maybe the joke or
is it about saying the good people right
is sort of not joking
>> part of that part of that hey now part
of that perspective
but I mean this is one thing I'm
absolutely certain about is that if
there is a realm of supernatural
experience that is real that is not just
your brain chemistry you can access it
maybe through altering your brain train
chemistry and taking Iawaska and
whatever. But if that reality is real,
it is 100% dangerous. Like d like
dangerous and especially by
>> 100%.
>> Well, not I I don't mean like every
aspect of of it is dangerous, but I mean
it is certainly dangerous. There are
dangers.
>> There are there are serious dangers
>> within it.
>> Tell me about your views on on
psychedelics.
>> So I have never taken psychedelics. I've
never been at an Iawaska retreat. This
is entirely based on reading and
conversations.
My view is that some psychedelics
almost certainly open you to contact
with nonhuman spiritual entities and
that they do so in a way that is
different from other forms of spiritual
experience in that again not in every
case but it can be sort of a shortcut.
But that shortcut means that you're
entering these landscapes without the
kind of preparation that not only the
traditional religions but the shamans
who use iawaska in the Amazon, right, or
wherever they use it would say is
necessary for these these kind of
encounters. And there's, you know, a
Twitter joke or a social media joke,
right, about, you know, getting
oneshotted by a sixthdimensional
messoamerican demon or something like
that that people make about these kind
of drugs. And that's a joke, but I don't
think it's entirely a joke. And so,
yeah, I think that that possibility is
real. And it does not at the same time
mean that lots of people can't take
these drugs and have mystical
experiences that just sort of convince
them that there's more to reality than
just the material. And that is a correct
view. So in that sense, the drugs teach
you something real about the world. But
it it can be like anything in human
life. And one of the points I try and
stress is that religion is not like out
there in some compartment where it's
totally different from every other thing
and you can't argue about it the way you
argue about other things and so on. No,
like in other aspects of human life,
dealing with the supernatural is like
dealing with the natural. There are good
things and bad things and dangers and
opportunities. And you just want to be
aware of that before you throw yourself
into a realm of experience that you
might not be prepared for. But I haven't
done it. And you have or have you
>> say what?
>> Have you? Have you? Yes. So you have,
you know, immediate immediate
information that I may not have, but you
know, one could argue that doing those
kind of drugs and coming back from it,
not with a sense that you've been
possessed by a Mesoamerican demon, but
coming back with a sense that, man,
there's more to the universe than I
thought, but I can never possibly figure
out the truth.
Also could be a deception that has been
imposed upon you. It could be all kinds
of things. I will say without going into
any detail that I had once an incredibly
profound and mystical experience
that was to my genuine shock completely
Jewish in nature and not from a side of
Judaism that is a side that I had been
brought up in
>> and that I've never been able to shake
and that has made me much more open to
my own tradition
>> than I would have thought.
>> Okay. And it actually
>> Can you give me a bit more?
>> No.
>> Okay.
>> Um
>> Okay, fair. That's fair.
>> But what I will say about it is that
>> Okay. Okay. Wait, wait, wait. I've had
So I've done a lot I've done I've done a
lot of these conversations, right? And
and this is not the first time when
someone in a conversation who is
officially sort of a mysterion as you
are has said, "Oh, but by the way, I did
have that one experience where it did
sound like God was talking to me." I've
had a few conversations like that. And
so what I want
>> more frightening than that.
>> Okay. Well, even here's what I'll give
you a little bit. I'll give you a little
bit. I wonder how happy our editors are
going to be about this conversation.
>> Oh, I think they're happy.
It it felt for
a very punctuated period of time like a
veil had been ripped open
and you could feel how
>> terrifying these forces really were.
>> This is not the part where I'm a
mysterion. This is a part where some
things are very hard to know where to
put and I've been trying to figure out
what to do with this within my own
tradition. Right?
you know, in terms of what I'm seeking,
I'm actually seeking something closer to
home, not something completely open. But
it has to also feel real to me. I need
to feel some nosis from it, as is put in
the book.
>> But do you have to
>> Well, I feel I do.
But but why I I guess why isn't why
isn't that
>> so again without like overescribing your
own experience to you?
Like why isn't that enough to say okay
the god of my fathers in some way gave
me a glimpse of what you know why were
Jews and not mysterians
>> and I'm just going to go to my I mean
you need to you know pick a politically
appropriate synagogue and so on right
and and there are all kinds of issues
with that but I'm just going to go I'm
going to go to synagogue even if I don't
feel nosis like I I mean I don't feel
nosis from Sunday mass with my over
supply of children, right? I mean,
occasionally maybe
>> you seem more comfortable with that than
I am.
>> Yeah, a lot. Well, this is an
interesting psychological thing that I
found in these in these discussions. I
think part of it is having been around
other people who had spiritual
experiences, right, and sort of observed
them and therefore accepted that like,
okay, some people have profound
experiences. I don't. Maybe I would if I
took Iawaska, but it's okay for me to be
a person who isn't getting nosis all the
time, but is like I feel good at mass.
Not always, but most of the time. But it
just seems to me that like, you know,
when you're called before the throne of,
you know, the most high and the cherubim
and saraphim are there and you're like,
well, I wanted some nosis. And God is
like, I gave you nosis. I gave you the
big dose. But here's here's I think
where the question of organized religion
becomes then complicated.
>> As I said, it comes from a part of
Judaism that is not the one I grew up in
or even really know how to find out
there. It's definitely there. I can find
it. I could talk to people in Judaism
about it, but it's stranger. And the
reason it felt
>> You mean the mystical part of the much
more mystical part of Judaism. Hold on.
Let me let me finish my thing.
>> Yeah. Sure. And in part because I had so
little experience with that had to
actually find the structure for what it
was later that it didn't feel like
something my own mind had just invented.
Right. Whoa.
I don't know if that got caught on the
um camera, but uh part of the ceiling
tape just fell down in front of Ross.
You can take your signs where you get
them.
>> Okay,
>> there you go.
Uh,
>> this will be better on video this
particular episode.
>> Yep.
>> So, um,
>> and then you go to
>> Sorry,
>> things happen.
>> Then you go to your your sort of space
that's more organized
and what you're seeing doesn't track
that at all.
>> No, that's that's fair. And honestly, we
had I mean, as a kid, we had experiences
like that in my own family where my
parents, especially my mother, we were
Episcopalian,
which is, you know, a very anti-mystical
part of Christianity overall. And my
mother had these intense experiences in
a context of like charismatic healing
services. And then we wanted a church to
go to. And it was hard to find starting
in mainline Protestantism a church where
it seemed like the thing that she had
encountered
was also there in some way. And I think
in the end, you know, we went through a
lot of places and ended up as Catholics
in part because I do think Catholicism
does a good job of saying, look, we're
not expecting the Holy Spirit to descend
constantly all the time. We have, you
know, it's a ritual religion and the
sacraments work whether or not you're
feeling a blast of God's presence, but
it is a reasonable desire to feel like
the encounter you have has some
relationship to what is being done on
the altar or done in the rituals. I
think that's completely understandable.
>> One perception of these drugs or
medicines or whatever you want to call
them is that they're pretty profound
spiritual technologies. if you believe
in them from that perspective as opposed
you believe they're just inducing some
sort of random firings of chemicals. So
you might imagine this is something that
in a world that got disenchanted,
you would want these big traditions to
to try to take on to try to build some
containers of safety and knowledge
around them. But they seem like a thing
that can pretty reliably
create an experience that actually
connects people in a very profound way
to their home tradition. Now it can do
other things too but as you say that's
true for a lot of things in religion.
Why should they not be used as that? Why
why treat them as a cult as opposed to
perhaps like a somewhat providential
thing that emerged at this time when
people badly need the help of things
that create a kind of re-enchantment and
breaks the shell of logic that makes for
many faith so difficult. No, I think
that's a fair question and I think one
answer is that they like all things that
operate in reality from a Christian
perspective, they must have some
providential
expression. And the Catholic view
basically is that you're not supposed to
try and commune with spirits, speak to
the dead in certain ways, like you
shouldn't go to a seance. like there's a
certain set of supernatural experiences
that Catholics are not supposed to seek
out and there's some biblical warrant
for this and there's sort of the the
explicit teaching teaching of the church
and the simplest way to express why that
is maybe is to say that the church
thinks there's a certain set of things
that we know God is present in and then
there's a certain set of things that are
just like opening doors and God and his
providence can certainly be there when
you open the door but we don't have any
kind of guarantee
of that and by opening the door you are
opening yourself in a way that is that
is fundamentally unsafe. Now again does
that mean that someone can't come to God
by taking a psychedelic? No. Absolutely
someone can under this theory. But for
the church itself or for Christians in
general, there is a sense I think that
like well once you are in
then you aren't supposed to go looking
in those places anymore because we just
don't know what the potential dangers
are there. Here's the other skeptic
interpretation of what I just said.
The very fact that you can reliably
induce mystical experience,
it just shows that this is just random
firings of brain chemicals
that this should make you much more
skeptical all the way through that
mystical experience has any truth value
to it at all. The fact that something
that in the case of LSD, a Swiss chemist
synthesized
just mere decades ago can be some sort
of reliable portal to people feeling
that they had some kind of mystic
experience. It actually implies that
none of this was ever mystic at all.
That there's some kind of pattern of
brain chemicals that you can fire off.
That in the same way some patterns will
make you
depressed and other patterns will make
you think your body is itching, you
know, and other things will do that.
There's one of those patterns creates
the misapprehension of the numinous
and that all this is actually not an
argument for any kind of belief. None of
it is spiritual technology. What it
shows you is that there's kind of
nothing here and it actually just
explains away
>> a huge category of experience that leads
people towards these fantastical claims.
>> Right? And to be clear, I don't think
that one should ever rest the case for
the existence of God or the supernatural
on psychedelic experiences alone,
anything like that. But
>> near-death experiences in the book,
right? There's fasting, right? There's a
lot of induced mystical experience or
mystical experience in moments of
extremist. And you do take it seriously.
So I I guess I'm asking why not just the
brain chemicals. I think what one should
take seriously is the fact that clearly
our minds exist in a dynamic
relationship to our bodies and to
physical reality and religious
experience again to take the Barbara
Aaron Reich example there is the kind of
religious experience that falls on
people unbidden in some way and I have
seen this happen and I think it's a
little bit hard to tell a brain
chemistry story where It's like why do
human beings suddenly have this god
apprehension thing that that just sort
of turns on? Like where did this
apprehension device come from? All our
other apprehension devices are evolved
to meet some sort of actual reality.
>> Well, can I force you to steal me on
this? Because
>> if you've ever read an Oliver Sax book
or familiar I mean as you are I know
with mental illnesses there are many
things that happen in our brains where
you might say why do we have something
like that that can ever turn on? But we
do.
Yes, but religious experience and
spiritual experience are at the very
least in a distinct category from mental
illness in that people who have
religious experiences are very often
entirely sane and entirely aware of the
strangeness of the experience they've
had and so on. again, which doesn't I I
take your point about the Alverac stuff,
like you could just say, okay, well,
people's brains can misfire in this way
and it yields mental illness and they
misfire in that way and they think
they're encountering the numinous or
something like that. I don't think
that's an impossible view to hold. All
I'm saying is that the religious world
picture already takes it for granted
that your body, the physicality of your
body has some kind of connection to your
apprehension of the divine. And most of
the time you are not supposed to be
apprehending the divine. And this goes
to your, you know, to go back to your
vision, right? The idea that like
religion is a scaffolding. Okay. Like
reality itself is kind of the Silicon
Valley guys say it's a simulation,
right? Okay. Well, it's a world that
you're supposed to be in. You're
supposed to be in this world. Whatever
God is up to doesn't work if we're not
in this world most of the time. And
having a spiritual experience is getting
our mind a little bit out of this
material world, but it's not the way
things are supposed to work all the
time. We're here as material embodied
creatures for a reason. But yeah, I
don't think there's anything internally
contradictory about thinking that the
clear link between the physical and the
spiritual means that you could reduce
the spiritual to the physical
experience. I I always enjoy that there
are these two completely opposite
theories of what the brain is doing. And
I'm not saying one isn't much more
accepted than the other, but there's the
understanding the more materialistic
sense of it that everything in our
experience is the brain. And then
there's the theory that I've heard from
some consciousness researchers that
exist in the near-death experience world
that some of the psychedelics people
believe that the brain is a kind of like
a reducing valve.
>> Yes.
>> Tell me about that thought. Yeah, that's
just the idea that whatever the mind or
soul or consciousness is is capable of
this much wider apprehension of reality,
including divine realities, whatever
those may be, that aren't really fully
compatible with like being an embodied
creature in the world. And so to be an
embodied creature in the world, your
mind's capacities and experiences need
to be reduced, funneled down to the
sensory inputs being processed by your
eyes and nose and mouth and ears. And so
that's why when you have moments when
you shake up the brain, when you put the
brain in extreme circumstances via
fasting or these kind of things or when
you reach the threshold of death, the
mind's experience doesn't actually seem
to contract. It seems to expand. And one
of the challenges in explaining
something like near-death experiences
from the materialist perspective is that
they are described not as fragmentaryary
hallucinations, dreamlike experiences,
random, chaotic.
>> They are described as more real than
real, incredibly intense. They carry
back into people's post near-death
experience lives. They cause big changes
to people's near-death experience lives.
And it really is a little bit hard to
tell an evolutionary just so story about
why the brain is wired for some
Darwinian reason to generate its most
intense experiences at a time when for
most people you're just going to die.
>> You talk in the book about something you
call official knowledge. What's official
knowledge?
Official knowledge is the knowledge
about the world that is considered
normal and respectable in publications
like the New York Times, Ivy League
universities, most Wikipedia entries.
You know the thing the thing
>> you find very strange things on
Wikipedia. You can, but to their credit,
in a certain way, the editors of
Wikipedia try to impose some of the same
assumptions about the world that are
shared by most of the formal
institutions of knowledge creation out
there.
One of the things that has happened to
you over the years, you've written very
beautifully about is you've had profound
struggles with chronic lime and it made
you more open to the way a lot of people
feel failed by official knowledge and
the institutions that produce it.
And I've been interested in how that
experience, which I think is blazed in
some ways through the book, um,
the generalizability of it for you, like
what happens when all of a sudden what
is official knowledge no longer conforms
to the world as you experience it and
the sort of crowbar of skepticism that
places between not just you and you know
that particular institution,
>> but maybe you and all of them
simultaneously. If this could be wrong,
if this could have failed me so
profoundly,
well, who's to say it's not all failing
me so profoundly?
>> Yes. No, that I mean that is the feeling
that you have, right? And so I had still
have to some degree, but I'm much better
a chronic illness that is not officially
recognized by the Centers for Disease
Control. And indeed to say that you have
the chronic form of Lyme disease is to
identify yourself in some way with just
the world of everyone from RFK Jr. to
you know holistic wellness practitioners
and so in a whole world that is held in
severe disrepute by official knowledge
official medical knowledge. You say kind
of pointing at me.
>> Pointing No, I I No, no, no. I mean, I
think I think at the you know, this
conversation has been the most serious
blow to official knowledge since uh No,
I don't. Um Yeah. And so that obviously
like I really was sick. I really did get
better using a combination of really
strong antibiotics and other stranger
things that are not recommended by the
CDC, but it really did work. And I am
morally certain both that chronic Lyme
disease absolutely exists and the CDC's
recommendations are absolutely wrong. So
then the challenge is you've seen that
the pillar of official truth has a hole
in it. How many holes does that mean
that there are? And something that I
have very self-consciously tried to do
in my own thinking about this, and this
applies to arguments about religion and
religious belief as well, is to not
assume that because official knowledge
is wrong about one thing, it's wrong
about everything. That seems like a big
mistake. And two, not to assume that
because official knowledge is wrong
about one thing, one important thing
that really affected my life that all
evidentiary standards should be thrown
out or anything like that. But that's
clearly a really hard psychological
balance to strike. I think you just see
this. I saw it myself. I spent a lot of
time in worlds of chronic illness and
alternative medicine and people just for
totally understandable reasons became
fullsp spectrum skeptics about anything
the government said anything that the
you know American medical association
said it was just if they're wrong about
my illness and my experience they must
be wrong about everything the pull of
that is incredibly strong and in the
case of religion right like I think one
of the things understandably that nice
secular agnostic people fear about going
too far with like my arguments is that
the next thing you know we're going to
be throwing out all of modern science
and progress and locking up Galileo and
so on all these things and I don't want
to say that that's not a legitimate fear
there clearly are ways in which
religious belief and religious doctrine
can end up being an impediment to
finding out what is true about the I'm
interested in what is true about the
world in the end. That is my goal is and
your goal, right? Hopefully, right? All
of our goal as journalists is to figure
out what is true about the world. And I
think to my mind very clearly certain
things are true about the world that
have to do with God and the possibility
of the supernatural that are not
encompassed by current official
knowledge. And I think the modern
liberal project is correct that there
are just limits to the kind of certainty
you can have and how that certainty
should cash out certainly in politics.
So there is a balance and yeah anytime
you're trying to correct an official
consensus
you are looking for a balance where the
correction doesn't become an
overcorrection. when we were young
bloggers so many years ago,
>> so many many years ago. Yes.
>> It it felt then, you know, the political
system seemed deeply polarized on taxes,
on foreign policy, on the Affordable
Care Act. And I'm not saying those
polarizations don't still exist. They
do. But we seem more fundamentally
polarized now on official knowledge than
on anything else.
>> Yep. And the parts of the Democratic
party that were sort of outside that
consensus led by a figure like RFK Jr.
have sort of become parts of the
Republican party, the parts of the
Republican party that were more inside
that consensus and want to stay there.
Some of them like Liz Cheney and Adam
Kinzinger and Mitt Romney have sort of
moved away from at least the Trump
Republican party.
So the coalitions which used to have a
mix of people sort of inside and outside
like official consensus
now are split between them. And like
this feels to me like one of the things
that is really deranged
are politics that the the parties are
sort of imbalanced in terms of their
relationship to institutions. Democrats
may be too trusting. Republicans much
much much in my view too skeptical with
sort of too little sort of empirical and
grounding anymore. I guess I was curious
before you said yep a bunch of times if
you agreed with that way of
>> No I I I absolutely do. Although I Yeah,
I mean I would on your last point.
>> Yes, you would. I well I would push
harder on I think one reason that Donald
Trump is president again is precisely
that the party of official knowledge
seemed to do a lot of really crazy
things and that made people more
sympathetic to the party of outsider
knowledge but look now the party of
outsider knowledge is in power
>> but let me add to that that story just
in one way which I think the
polarization had already happened and
that's actually part of what that period
represented one of the Democrats didn't
have during that period was actually
enough skepticism of the institutions of
official knowledge. I think you would
agree that the people pushing
>> a lot of the ideas that that you see as
destructive from them and some of them I
probably also feel were ultimately
destructive
>> were doing so wrapped in the garb of
official knowledge you know wrapped in
credentials coming out of universities
etc that it was in part actually an
institutional monoculture on the
democratic side that created a loss of
some of some antibodies that might have
created some friction between that and
going way too far.
>> Yeah.
>> And then, you know, now you have the
other side in in power also without any
antibodies.
>> Yes. And I think one of my
disappointments
about the Trump administration in the
first three months is just how how pure
and uncut its outsiderism seems to be.
And you know, I think it was an open
question when Trump was reelected. Would
RFK Jr. be running HHS or would he be
running the president's council on
making America healthy again? Right. And
we got the timeline where he's running
HHS. And you can multiply examples. And
I think in many of those examples, you
can see a version of the problem that I
identified to you just now, which is
that you can see it in the trade and
tariffs debate. This assumption that the
experts got something big wrong and
therefore Peter Navaro should make trade
policy and the second does not follow
from the first. And the huge challenge
for conservatism
right now is to figure out how you
generate some kind of stability of
actual expertise in a party that is now
temperamentally
completely
anti-establishment populist and so on.
And I think there was a hope that the
sort of Silicon Valley faction that
migrated into the Republican camp in
part in reaction to some of the failures
of expertise that you just you just
acknowledged would sort of play a
version of that role. And I think
definitely Elon Musk has not played a
version of that role to date. So you're
the Republican party is a party in
search of a stable system of official
knowledge generation besides whatever
Donald Trump decides, right? And it
doesn't have one at the moment for the
foreseeable future.
>> Always our final question. What are
three books you'd recommend to the
audience?
>> So I'm going to give three books on
religion that connect to my attempt to
sort of shift what official knowledge or
the official knowledge of New York Times
podcast listeners think about religion.
The first one is a book called from
about 20 years ago by a physicist named
Steven Bar called ancient physics and
modern faith. That is I think despite
being a little bit dated is still really
the best overall survey of sort of where
arguments in modern physics that relate
to religion stand and how a reasonable
person might think about it. It's not a
dogmatic book. It's a very open-minded
and interesting book. So that's book
one. Since we were talking about
near-death experiences, there's a
million books about near-death
experiences, many of them bad. I think
people who are interested in this
subject, interested in the conversation,
one recommendation would be a book
called After by Bruce Grayson, who's a I
think psychiatrist or neuroscientist
from the University of Virginia, who
just has a good overview, I would say,
from a perspective of a practicing
physician of why people take these
strange stories seriously and why it
might unsettle a materialist worldview.
And the third book, I mean, honestly,
Ezra, since you've, you know, maybe this
is unnecessary since you conceded so
much ground to the mysterians, but I
think a final book that's useful to
people who listen to this show and are
like, what are these two guys smoking
talking about consciousness like this is
a book that was very controversial in
the philosophical community when it came
out. Um but a book called Mind and
Cosmos by Thomas Nagel was a famous
philosopher not religious but arguing
for the fundamental limits and problems
with a materialist framework on the
world and it is a very short book which
is why I don't hesitate to recommend it.
A lot of books about consciousness are
not short, but this one I think you can
read and get a sense of why intelligent
people might at least be inclined
towards an Ezra Klein style mysterionism
if not quite towards the militant
Catholicism of Ross Tath.
>> Ross, I enjoyed it a ton. Thank you very
much.
>> I enjoyed it as well, Ezra. Thank you so
[Music]
This episode of the Ezra Klein show is
produced by Eliasquith. Factecking by
Kate Sinclair, Mary Marge Locker, and
Michelle Harris. Our senior engineer is
Jeff Gell with additional mixing by
Isaac Jones with Almond Sot and Aphim
Shapiro. Our executive producer is
Claire Gordon. The show's production
team also includes Marie Cassion, Annie
Galvin, Roland Hu, Marina King, Yan
Cobalt, Kristen Lynn, and Jack McCordic.
We have original music by Pat McCusker.
Audience strategy by Christina Samooski
and Shannon Busta. The director of New
York Times opinion audio is Annie Rose
Straer.